Student Mobility & Credit Transfer 
by Nathan R.G. Barnett and Emma Coppins

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Post-secondary credentials are “engines of social mobility and equity” as they help “prepare graduates both for the labour market and for further studies”;1 and a strong credit transfer system is an important element of an equitable, accessible, and diverse post-secondary sector. With the quickly evolving postsecondary landscape and growing transfer needs that have emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a perfect opportunity to revisit student mobility and credit transfer through investments in supports, growing and strengthening transfer pathways, and better understanding the needs of transfer students in the province. 
THE PROBLEM 
Inconsistent, Non-Transparent Fees 
Students have raised concerns about inconsistent and non-transparent fees that mean transfer students are forced to pay fees that may amount to more than just their transfer process and that students are paying different amounts for the same or similar transfer services across Ontario. They have also raised concerns that by having transfer fees through both the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre (OUAC) and universities, students may end up paying additional fees for the same documentation or work. They are also concerned about the three-application minimum for OUAC application fees that fail to consider transfer students who typically apply to less than three programs. Necessary documentation and/or evaluations, as well as commonly used credit recognition processes, may be financially inaccessible to students. Students are also concerned about the unforeseen financial, emotional, and academic stressors faced by students who are unexpectedly forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program. 
Gaps in Credit Recognition Processes 
Universities in Ontario do not use a consistent credit or prior learning recognition process, and students are concerned that not all transferable credits are course equivalencies, which can result in students being required to take additional courses and/or graduate with more credits than necessary. They are also concerned about unstandardized elements of course outlines that limit the ability to establish consistent course equivalencies across institutions. Students have also raised concerns that Faculty have significant autonomy in granting credit transfers which can create inconsistencies in credit recognition and threatens student stability, and there is no independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision. They are further concerned about the current gap in guidelines for recognizing microcredentials. 

Delayed and Inaccessible Information 
Students have told us that some institutions do not tell students which of their credits will be recognized until after they have accepted their offer of admission, and delayed information about what credits transfer may result in students changing or settling on different transfer plans. Transfer decisions are often made on a case-by-case basis which results in inconsistent information and academic support regarding the transfer process. Many students are concerned that they are unsure of where to find information about transferring, including, but not limited to, fees, deadlines, and grade expectations, and that they are confused and misled by conflicting and unclear information in a confusing system. There are additional concerns that students who need to transfer due to campus climate issues or personal circumstances may not meet the grade requirements necessary to do so. 
1 Mary Catharine Lennon, Amanda Brijmohan, Eric Lavinge, Jinli Yang, Gavin Moodie, and Leesa Wheelahan, Ontario Student Mobility: Carving Paths of Desire (Toronto: Centre for the Study of Canadian and International Higher Education, OISE-University of Toronto, February 2016). 

Barrier for International Transfer Students 
Students are also concerned about the barriers that international transfer students face, especially given the fact that there is little research on these barriers and international students face unique challenges when it comes to understanding and navigating complex transfer and credit recognition processes. They are also concerned that there are limited resources to support credit assessments for international transfer students, accreditation or recognition of international transfer credits, and access to verifiable and sufficient international documents. This is exacerbated by the fact that international students who do not inform Immigration and Citizenship Canada that they are transferring between institutions within Canada risk being asked to leave the country and may not be approved for future study or work permits. 
Lack of Transfer-Specific Supports 
Transfer pathways and credit recognition processes are complex, institution-, program-, and student-specific, and can be difficult to navigate for transfer students and potential transfer students who are often accessing these pathways for the first time, and students are concerned that there are little transfer-specific supports available. There is also concern that important province-wide resources like ONTransfer.ca are not well-known and are therefore underutilized by transfer students. Students are also concerned that Indigenous students, particularly those from Indigenous Institutes, may have more limited options and may be forced to take on additional labour to educate and advocate for themselves throughout the transfer process, especially in an environment where there may not be many people with similar lived experiences. 
Gaps and Barriers in Transfer Pathways 
Students are concerned about the gaps and barriers in transfer pathways, especially given that universities often do not consider college credits equivalent to university credits, even when the course content and learning outcomes are the same. They are also concerned that students who receive credits earned through PLAR processes in college may be unable to transfer the credit to university, forcing them to take additional courses in an area where it has already been proven they have sufficient knowledge. Further, students transferring between colleges and universities are often not aware of which resources are available to them and how to access the support they need, which is challenging considering the limited number of transfer pathways, particularly in fields with fewer transfer options. There is also a lack of consistent, relevant, and timely data on the success of transfer students and transfer pathways which means stakeholders are often unaware of barriers to, and successes in, the transfer process. 
For transfer students from Indigenous Institutes, and private and Francophone institutions, to publicly assisted universities in Ontario, there is minimal, if any, data discussing the barriers, supports, and potential solutions. However, we do know that students from Indigenous Institutes, and private and Francophone institutions, are not given the option to select their current place of study on ONTransfer.ca, as the program search only provides options for college or university; that there are limited transfer pathways or articulation agreements between Indigenous Institutes and public universities and colleges; that Indigenous Institutes are not present in policies relevant to transferring institutions; and that there is a lack of funding for Indigenous Institutes to develop and provide the support and resources that students need to transfer institutions. Students are additionally concerned about these barriers given that there is a lack of institutions that provide relevant programs for Francophone students in Ontario, and as a result students may wish to transfer outside of the province but often have a difficult time doing so. 

Lack of Data 
The current lack of available data on who transfers, why, and student outcomes after transferring can detrimentally hurt students’ ability to make informed choices and understand how the transfer process can impact their success in post-secondary, while also hindering the ability to make informed decisions to support broader sector sustainability. The limited data on credit transfer pathways that does exist is either not publicly available or it is inaccessible to sector stakeholders. These data gaps have a detrimental impact on funding, which negatively impacts post-secondary institutions’ abilities to meet transfer student needs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 

Consistent and Transparent Fees 
To address concerns about the affordability of credit transfer processes, students recommend that the provincial government mandate that post-secondary institutions include a breakdown of what is included in transfer fees, including supplemental documentation/evaluation fees, to students before they are charged; all universities in Ontario include any transfer-related fees as part of the supplemental/document evaluation fee paid via OUAC or ontariocolleges.ca; and the application fee for students seeking to transfer is not tied to a minimum number of applications or exceed the number of programs to which a student may choose to apply. 
The provincial government should also provide funding for registrars’ offices to cover the cost associated with providing students with official documentation, such as official transcripts and enrollment verification forms; to post-secondary institutions under the mandate that all post-secondary institutions commit to offering affordable PLAR in accordance with best practices to ensure the process is transparent to students; and to all students who are forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program to assist with application, relocation, and other transfer-related costs. 
Improving Credit Recognition Processes 
To strengthen credit recognition processes and address barriers, student recommend that the provincial government develop and host a digital repository for PLAR practitioners to share resources and best practices across institutions. The provincial government should also develop, standardize, and host a public repository of course outlines at all post-secondary institutions in the province; and work with the Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations (OCUFA), the Council of Ontario Universities (COU), and Colleges Ontario (CO), to develop standardized language for syllabi and course outlines to assist with transfer decisions and develop key learning outcomes and skills aimed at first-and second-year foundational courses to assist with transfer decisions. 
Additionally, the provincial government should develop an accountability framework to encourage university and college faculty to collaborate and discuss disciplinary articulation as well as develop guidelines to support institutions to outline an independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision that includes who can and cannot make decisions as well as support systems for students throughout the appeal process. The provincial government should also establish credit articulation and recognition guidelines for assessing the transferability of microcredentials. 
Timely and Accessible Information 
To ensure students have timely and accessible information about their transfer pathway, the provincial government should incentivize universities to inform transfer students of transfer credit decisions alongside students’ offers of admission. Additionally, the provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions develop appeal processes for students who believe the credit transfer timeline negatively impacted their ability to make a transfer decision and that post-secondary institutions share information regarding credit decisions and timelines be publicly available to all stakeholders. The provincial government should also provide envelope funding for post-secondary institutions to hire additional academic support services staff to work specifically with transfer students; provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) to combine oncat.ca and ONTransfer.ca for student ease and understanding, as well as funding to ensure the information is maintained, updated, and promoted in a timely manner to institutions and students; and mandate and provide funding for postsecondary institutions to develop an extenuating circumstances procedure for students looking to transfer who do not meet grade or program requirements due to circumstances beyond their control. 
Supporting International Transfer Students 
To support international transfer students, the provincial government should provide additional funding to ONCAT to support system-level research into the experiences and barriers faced by international students related to credit recognition and transfer; fund the development and maintenance of a system-wide equivalency and agreement database for international transfer; and provide funding for postsecondary institutions to hire student outreach, support staff, and advisors for international students looking to transfer within Ontario. 
Improving Transfer-Specific Supports 
To ensure students have access to transfer-specific supports, the provincial government should provide funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach and support staff and advisors for transfer students; increase funding to ONCAT to continue maintaining, strengthening, and advertising ONTransfer.ca; and mandate that all frontline staff, including academic advisors, have cultural competency training regarding how to best support and advise Indigenous transfer students, particularly those who are transferring from Indigenous Institutes and may be at higher risk experiencing cultural shock. 

Strengthening Transfer Pathways 
To strengthen transfer pathways, the provincial government should mandate universities to work with ONACT in building consistent and appropriate tools to fairly consider transfer credits. The provincial government should also provide funding to institutions to implement and advertise additional support services for students looking to transfer to a different type of post-secondary institution and to ONCAT to research and publish information regarding the barriers and successes of students transferring between colleges and universities and transfer pathways. Further, the provincial government should encourage universities and colleges to develop transfer pathways, particularly in fields and/or programs that have a limited number of existing pathways. 
The provincial government should also provide funding to ONCAT to research and publish a report and make recommendations on demographics, reasons for transfer, barriers, and supports for students transferring from Indigenous Institutes, private, or Francophone institutions to publicly assisted postsecondary institutions in Ontario, and then adopt the recommendations made by ONCAT. They should also provide ONCAT with funding to update Ontario Postsecondary Transfer Guide with relevant and specific information for students from Indigenous Institute, private and Francophone institutions looking to transfer to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
To support students who transform to or from Indigenous Institutes specifically, the provincial government should encourage publicly assisted post-secondary institutions to work with Indigenous Institutes to develop specific pathway programs to facilitate transferring; and, upon the development and review of existing government policies related to transfer, the provincial government should work with Indigenous Institutes to ensure that they are represented in policies and eligible for related funding. They should also provide funding to Indigenous Institutes to develop resources necessary to build transfer systems and pathways. 
Finally, the provincial government should expand ONCAT’s mandate to include working outside the province where necessary, particularly for Francophone students looking to transfer to continue their bilingual/French education. 
Data Collection for Transfer Student Success and Sector Sustainability 
To fill data and information gaps, COU and the Ontario College Application Service should develop and implement a non-compulsory survey through OUAC and ontariocolleges.ca to gather demographic information on students, including transfer students, when they apply to universities and colleges and the provincial government should task and fund ONCAT to collect data and publicly report on why students transfer, which students transfer, what credits were successfully transferred, and student success rates (including, but not limited to: graduation rates, sense of belonging, GPAs, etc.) once they have transferred. The provincial government should also change the Credit Transfer Institutional Grant to be 
based on application and need, rather than solely the number of transfer students. 


INTRODUCTION 
Post-secondary credentials are “engines of social mobility and equity” as they help “prepare graduates both for the labour market and for further studies”;2 and a strong credit transfer system is an important element of an equitable, accessible, and diverse post-secondary sector. Credit transfer and recognition systems provide students with access to the expanding learning, researching, and working opportunities available offered by post-secondary institutions. They also create opportunities for students who follow non-traditional post-secondary pathways, opening doorways for students who bring unique and diverse perspectives and ideas to their institutions, and ultimately enhancing the value of a post-secondary degree. Credit transfer and recognition systems also reduce costs for both students and the government as it mitigates the need for duplicate learning.3 
Having a strong transfer and credit recognition system supports the varied reasons that students choose or may be required to transfer. Students may be driven by personal or financial reasons, educational or career goals. Academic pathways are evolving to better recognize why students might transfer and how we can best support student success. Processes like Prior Learning and Assessment Recognition (PLAR) – “a process for assessing the knowledge, skills, and abilities that a candidate has acquired in informal and non-formal settings for the purposes of awarding academic credit, and is practiced across Canada and internationally”4 – recognize that learning is not limited to the classroom and that work, life, and other experiences contribute to a student’s knowledge. Memoranda of understanding (MOUs), articulation agreements, and formal transfer pathways allow students to better navigate academic pathways and make choices that will best support their success. 
In 2011, the provincial government made student mobility and credit transfer a priority with a 5-year, $73.7 million commitment to support post-secondary institutions create credit-transfer pathways. As part of this commitment, they developed a new, more comprehensive credit transfer system consisting of: (1) a policy framework; (2) the newly formed Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) and ONTransfer.ca; (3) the Credit Transfer Innovation Fund; (4) institutional grants to support transfer students; and (5) an accountability framework made up of performance measures, data elements, and audit requirements to be finalized and implemented by 2015.5 However, the credit transfer and recognition system in Ontario has been criticized for not having a strong foundation, in part because of the non-complementary aims of different levels of post-secondary institutions, as well as the fact that post-secondary institutions in the province are not required to include pathway agreements in their normal institutional activities, shifting the burden to government agencies to incentivize institutions.6 
Since 2011 and the early years of Ontario’s credit transfer system, the provincial government has shifted their focus away from transfer pathways and little attention has been paid to addressing the barriers and challenges faced by transfer students, with the exception of the ongoing work and necessary work of ONCAT and student mobility and credit transfer sector leaders. With the quickly evolving post-secondary landscape and growing transfer needs that have emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a perfect opportunity to revisit student mobility and credit transfer through investments in supports, growing and strengthening transfer pathways, and better understanding the needs of transfer students in the province. We hope that the recommendations in this policy paper will be used by the provincial government to ensure that student voices are centered in this work and that the needs of transfer students are prioritized. 
2 Mary Catharine Lennon, Amanda Brijmohan, Eric Lavinge, Jinli Yang, Gavin Moodie, and Leesa Wheelahan, Ontario Student Mobility: Carving Paths of Desire (Toronto: Centre for the Study of Canadian and International Higher Education, OISE-University of Toronto, February 2016). 3 Stacey J. Young, Pierre G. Piché, and Glen A. Jones, “Student Pathways and Differentiation Policies in Ontario: Are they compatible?,” Policy Reviews in Higher Education 4, no. 1 (2020). 4 Mary J. Harrison, Best Practices in Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition in Ontario Colleges and Universities (Fanshawe, December 2018). 5 Council of Ministers of Education, Canada, Report of the CMEC Credit Transfer Working Group (Council of Ministers of Education, Canada, 2012). 6 Lennon et al., Ontario Student Mobility. 

SYSTEM DESIGN 
COSTS 
Principle: Institutions should not use transfer fees as a way to generate profit. 
Principle: Students should be able to easily, directly, and seamlessly pay transfer fees. 
Principle: Students should be able to freely and easily access their own documentation, including documentation from prior educational institutions. 
Principle: Students should not have to pay unnecessary application fees. 
Principle: Students should have access to documentation without having to take on a financial burden. 
Principle: Available credit recognition processes, such as Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition, should be affordable and accessible for all students who want or need them. 
Principle: Students who are forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program should be supported throughout the process by both the institution and the government. 
Concern: Because of inconsistent and non-transparent fees, transfer students are forced to pay fees that may amount to more than just their transfer process. 
Concern: Supplemental documentation/evaluation fees are not transparent or consistent and result in students paying different amounts for the same or similar transfer services across Ontario. 
Concern: By having transfer fees through both the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre and universities, students are poorly informed by institutions and the government of how much transferring costs and may end up paying additional fees for the same documentation or work. 
Concern: Base application fees through the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre impose a three-application minimum, charging transfer students who are applying to less than three programs unnecessary fees. 
Concern: Students may not be able to access necessary documentation and/or evaluations required by a post-secondary institution in order to transfer due to inaccessibility and/or repetitive costs. 
Concern: Commonly used credit recognition processes, such as Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition, are not financially accessible to all students. 
Concern: Students who are unexpectedly forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program face many unforeseen financial, emotional, and academic stressors. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions include a breakdown of what is included in transfer fees, including supplemental documentation/evaluation fees, to students before they are charged. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate that all universities in Ontario include any transfer-related fees as part of the supplemental/document evaluation fee paid via the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre or ontariocolleges.ca. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate that the application fee for students seeking to transfer is not tied to a minimum number of applications or exceed the number of programs to which a student may choose to apply. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should develop envelope funding for registrars’ offices to cover the cost associated with providing students with official documentation, such as official transcripts and enrollment verification forms. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding to post-secondary institutions under the mandate that all post-secondary institutions commit to offering affordable Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition in accordance with best practices to ensure the process is transparent to students. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide broad emergency funding to all students who are forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program to assist with application, relocation, and other transfer-related costs. 
Throughout the transfer process, students are faced with unforeseen and sometimes excessive fees that they are required to pay; and while there are administrative costs that come with processing applications or other transfer-related activities, using transfer students as profit-generators is unacceptable. Considering the high costs of transferring, the inconsistency among post-secondary institutions, and the lack of transparency for what these costs cover, there is concern that the fees associated with transferring are being used as a source of profit for post-secondary institutions. Instead, transfer fees should be determined using a cost-recovery model. 
Students often struggle to find information regarding the application process, including documentation/evaluation requirements, which varies across institutions and may include official transcripts, detailed course syllabi, and supplementary documents.7 The lack of information available to students looking to transfer results in students being misinformed or misled during the transfer process. For instance, supplemental/document evaluation fees are one example of an extra fee that students are required to pay during the transfer process. The fees range by institution, illustrated in the table below. 
Table 1: OUAC Supplemental/Document Evaluation Fees collected on behalf of universities, 2021-228 
Fee  Institution(s)  Fee  Institution(s)  
$50  Algoma University; University of Windsor  $85  University of Waterloo  
$60  Lakehead University; Nipissing University  $90  OCAD University; University of Ottawa; Ryerson University; University of Toronto; York University  
$68.50  Carleton University  $93.50  Western University  
$70  Laurentian University; Trent University  $95  McMaster University; Queen’s University (includes transfer credit evaluation)  
$75  Brock University  $100  

7 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, Switching Schools (Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, 2019), https://oncat.ca/sites/default/files/inline-images/oncat_pse_brochure_2019_en_web.pdf. 8 “105 – Fees,” Ontario Universities’ Application Centre, accessed September 20, 2021, https://www.ouac.on.ca/guide/105-fees/. Note that the fees listed in Table 1 do not include any additional supplemental/document evaluation fees that are payable directly to the university. 
$80 
University of Guelph/Guelph-Humber; 
University of Guelph -Veterinary 
Ontario Tech University; Wilfrid Laurier 
Medicine 
University 
The lack of cost breakdown and range of fees charged makes it unclear what the fees are for and ultimately results in students paying different amounts for the same or similar transfer services depending on the institution they are transferring to or from. This is further complicated by the fact that students are required to pay some transfer-related fees through the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre (OUAC) and others directly to the post-secondary institution. To address this concern, the provincial government should mandate that all post-secondary institutions be transparent with transfer students about which fees they will be required to pay – including a fee breakdown – prior to students making the decision to transfer. To make this information accessible to students, it should be available on the OUAC website, as well as the Ontario College Application Service’s application platform, ontariocolleges.ca. Because the OUAC website and ontariocolleges.ca is where students apply to university and college, students looking to transfer are likely familiar with these websites from their initial applications. Having all of the information in one place would allow for a straight-forward, easy, and accessible way to provide the relevant information to students who are looking to transfer. The provincial government should also ensure that students are not required to pay transfer-related fees in multiple locations by requiring all fees be paid through OUAC and ontariocolleges.ca. Some universities already include any transfer-related fees as part of the supplemental/document evaluation fee paid via OUAC. Having the transfer fees information, and processing all transfer fees on OUAC, will provide transparency for students throughout the transfer process, mitigating concerns that students are paying inconsistent and unnecessary fees. 
The process for students looking to transfer institutions includes an application process similar to the initial application process of entering university, which is through OUAC. OUAC charges a base application fee of $150, which allows for students, including those looking to transfer, to choose up to three programs.9 However, students looking to transfer are different from first-time applicants as most transfer students know to which program(s) they want to apply, and it is likely that it is less than three. A base application fee requirement that is based on a three-program minimum ultimately leaves transfer students paying unnecessary fees. Rather than implementing this base fee, the provincial government should mandate that the application fee for students seeking to transfer not be tied to a minimum number of applications or exceed the number of programs to which a student may choose to apply. 
In addition to supplemental/document evaluation fees and base application fees, transfer students also have to pay for the cost of their official transcript. Often students have to purchase an official transcript for each application, resulting in compounding costs. For example, at Trent University the cost to send an official transcript is $16. While this seems relatively affordable, the base application fee through OUAC requires students to apply to a minimum of three programs, increasing the cost to $48, on top of the application and any supplemental documentation/evaluation fees. These costs add up, affecting not only transfer students but also students who are continuing their education past post-secondary, or international students who need to extend their study permit. As official transcripts are a necessity for these processes, it is important that students do not become burdened by these costs. Therefore, the provincial government should provide envelope funding to registrars’ offices to cover the cost associated with providing students with official documentation, such as official transcripts. It is important that this funding is for registrars’ offices as they are the ones who process these requests and often have the administrative burden of providing these transcripts to students and other institutions. Additionally, by providing this funding directly to registrars’ offices, rather than involving students or reimbursing students for these costs, students are not forced to take on yet another additional cost. 
Students also pay fees when seeking recognition for prior learning outside of formal education settings. A commonly practiced and recognized process is Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition (PLAR), “a process for assessing the knowledge, skills, and abilities that a candidate has acquired in informal and 
9 Marian Buchanan, “The university application process in Ontario,” University Admissions in Canada, February 23, 2020, https://universityadmissions.ca/the-university-application-process-in-ontario/. 
non-formal settings for the purposes of awarding academic credit, and is practiced across Canada and internationally.”10 The Ministry of Colleges and Universities’ Framework for Programs and Instruction requires that PLAR be used at all Colleges of Applied Arts and Technology, but there is not an equivalent requirement for Ontario universities to offer PLAR.11 Because PLAR is not required at Ontario universities, “PLAR uptake at universities remains a contemporary challenge” with only three of 60 Canadian universities with a formal policy requiring institution-wide PLAR as of 2007.12 
As evidenced by the table below, very few universities offer PLAR processes. This creates a financial, and procedural, barrier for students looking to transfer because if a student does not have access to a PLAR process to recognize prior learning, they may be forced to take courses to receive credit for something they have already learned. This can be costly for students – in 2010 it is estimated that Ontario students spent around $40 million in duplicated courses13 – introducing a significant financial burden to an increasingly unaffordable education. Transfer students who are seeking credit recognition for prior learning through an informal pathway, such as employment, experience, or other way of learning not considered formal education, are faced with additional costs. PLAR processes should be made available to all students as lived experiences need to be valid towards academic credits. PLAR processes are currently mandated in colleges and with one of the most commonly used transfer pathways being college-to-university transfers, it is crucial that universities accept and offer PLAR processes for all students. However, the fees associated with PLAR are high and can be unaffordable for many students. These fees and the availability of PLAR processes at universities are illustrated below. 
Table 2: Institutional PLAR Fees Per Course, 2021-2214 
Institution  PLAR Offered  Fee  
Brock University  Domestic VISA  $498.70 $954.15  
Laurentian University  PLAR only offered for Law and Justice program  $0  
McMaster University  PLAR not offered  N/A  
Queen’s University  PLAR not offered  N/A  
Trent University  PLAR not offered  N/A  
University of Ottawa  Request eligibility examined Assessment itself  $25 $250  
University of Waterloo  PLAR not offered  N/A  
Western University  PLAR not offered  N/A  
Wilfrid Laurier University  PLAR not offered  N/A  

10 Harrison, Best Practices in Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition, 4. 11 Ibid. 12 Ibid, 9. 13 Louise Brown, “Ontario Website Makes it Easier for Students to Transfer Credits,” Toronto Star, January 16, 2014, https://www.thestar.com/news/queenspark/2014/01/16/website_allows_ontario_students_to_transfer_credits_with_ease.html. 14 “OnTransfer Index,” Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, accessed September 20, 2021, https://ontransfer.ca/index_en.php?page=start_transfer&slide_id=4. 
To mitigate the financial burdens associated with credit or learning duplication, the provincial government should mandate that all post-secondary institutions in Ontario offer PLAR processes to students who require them. The provincial government should also provide funding to post-secondary institutions to cover the costs of administering their PLAR process so that students do not have to shoulder these costs. When PLAR was first mandated for colleges in 1993, the provincial government provided funding through their general purpose operating grants, including $3 million to create a full-time prior learning and assessment position at all colleges.15 The provincial government should do the same for universities, providing additional funding in an amount proportional to university size and adjusted for inflation. This funding could be provided through the general purpose operating grants for universities to provide PLAR processes for credit courses. 
While transferring has many costs related to applications, relocation, and more, students who chose to transfer may have access to more resources or have a greater ability to plan than those who are forced to transfer. Additionally, the majority (64 percent) of transfers are to a nearby post-secondary institution, meaning the relocation costs are often reduced, or potentially even non-existent for students transferring within the same town.16 However, this is not always the case. For students who attended Laurentian University which recently faced massive program closures that resulted in a significant number of students needing to transfer, the closest university (Nipissing University) is located over 100 kilometers away, creating additional and unplanned costs associated just with the relocation. Students who are forced to transfer are likely to be overwhelmed and stressed, and while the government may not be able to assist with emotional burdens, some burdens can be alleviated with financial aid. As such, the provincial government should provide emergency funding to all students who are forced to transfer due to the immediate closure of their institution or program. This funding should come with a base of $1000 for each student (including international students) to account for the cost of applications as well as relocation fees and emotional support resources. However, it is important to acknowledge that not all student situations are the same and some will require more support. The provincial government should supplement the base funding of $1000 with needs-based funding that can be applied for by those who require it. This funding should not be limited to students whose programs are ending. Instead, it should be available to all students at a post-secondary institution that is closing programs as these students may be uncertain about the security of their current program and feel pressure or the need to transfer to secure their educational future. 
CREDIT RECOGNITION 
Principle: Post-secondary institutions should recognize and value various ways of knowing and learning outside of formal education systems. 
Principle: Students should not be required to retake course content they have already learned. Principle: Students who have relevant prior learning, knowledge, or experience should be supported when seeking to upgrade their credentials. 
Principle: Students should have access to clear, comprehensive information about the difference between course equivalencies and transferable credits for programs they are seeking to transfer to. 
Principle: Students should be able to challenge credit recognition decisions. Principle: Post-secondary institutions should recognize microcredentials when assessing a student’s prior learning and/or course equivalencies during the transfer process. 
Concern: Universities in Ontario do not use a consistent credit or prior learning recognition process. 
15 Harrison, Best Practices in Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition, 8. 16 Lennon at al., Ontario Student Mobility. 
Concern: Not all transferable credits are course equivalencies, which can result in students being required to take additional courses and/or graduate with more credits than necessary. 
Concern: Unstandardized elements of course outlines limit the ability to establish consistent course equivalencies across institutions. 
Concern: Faculty have significant autonomy in granting credit transfers which can create inconsistencies in credit recognition and threatens student stability. 
Concern: There is no independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision. 
Concern: There is currently a gap in guidelines for recognizing microcredentials. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should develop and host a digital repository for Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition practitioners to share resources and best practices across institutions. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should develop, standardize, and host a public repository of course outlines at all post-secondary institutions in the province. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should, in consultation with the Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations, the Council of Ontario Universities, and Colleges Ontario, develop standardized language for syllabi and course outlines to assist with transfer decisions. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should, in consultation with the Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations, the Council of Ontario Universities, and Colleges Ontario, develop key learning outcomes and skills aimed at first-and second-year foundational courses to assist with transfer decisions. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should develop an accountability framework to encourage university and college faculty to collaborate and discuss disciplinary articulation. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should develop guidelines to support institutions to outline an independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision that includes who can and cannot make decisions as well as support systems for students throughout the appeal process. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should establish credit articulation and recognition guidelines for assessing the transferability of microcredentials. 
One of the biggest barriers or challenges faced by students looking to transfer has to do with credit recognition and other forms of prior learning recognition. Students should have access to clear, comprehensive information about which of their credits will transfer; information on the difference between course equivalencies and transferable credits; what forms of prior learning will be recognized; as well as any other information necessary to make an informed decision and have clear expectations about transfer. This not only requires information being available, but also consistent credit and prior learning recognition processes and standards. 
Consistent, comprehensive processes and information for credit recognition and prior learning assessment are important for navigating the transfer process, as well as reducing costs and time burdens for students. In 2010, it was estimated that Ontario students spent $40 million in duplicated courses.17 In 2020 only 54 percent of transfer students who participated in the Ontario Undergraduate Student Survey said that all or nearly all of their credits transferred, which, coupled with the high cost of tuition, suggests that this continues to be an issue. Having to repeat a course also delays a student’s progression through 
17 Brown, “Ontario Website Makes it Easier for Students to Transfer Credits”. 
their post-secondary education which contributes to increased education costs.18 Unfortunately, there are many barriers to consistent and comprehensive credit and prior learning recognition processes that create barriers and challenges for transfer students. Two of the barriers to consistent and comprehensive credit recognition are the fact that not all transferable credits are course equivalencies – which can result in students being required to take additional courses and/or graduate with more credits than is necessary – and that there are unstandardized elements of course outlines, such as learning outcomes and course descriptions, which limit the ability to establish consistent course equivalencies across institutions.19 
Sector leaders like the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) have identified curriculum assessment as an important, but understudied, part of the transfer system.20 They recommend that “a public repository of outlines for courses offered at every Ontario postsecondary institution” be created to facilitate research on course outlines and curriculum assessment in order to make evidence-based improvements to the transfer system.21 This would help to “promote greater awareness about emerging practices” within disciplines, allow researchers to easily and efficiently gather this information, and provide an accessible way for students to find course outlines to support their transfer process.22 To this end, OUSA recommends that the provincial government develop and host a public repository of course outlines at all post-secondary institutions in the province. This would lay the foundation for future efforts to improve the credit recognition process. 
The provincial government should also work with the Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations (OCUFA), the Council of Ontario Universities (COU), and Colleges Ontario (CO) to develop standardized language for syllabi and course outlines to assist with transfer decisions. This should be aimed towards first-and second-year foundational courses, recognizing that these courses are most likely to have consistent learning outcomes and that institutions typically only accept a maximum of two years’ worth of credits. This does not mean that all courses would need to align, but that all syllabi will include things like “Key Learning Outcomes”, so that equivalencies can be easily assessed. For foundational courses, the provincial government should also work with OCUFA, COU, and CO to develop learning outcomes and skills to introduce a baseline for what is expected in these courses. This would support transfer decisions and could be a tool for quality assurance. 
Transferring credits through course equivalencies or credit recognition processes is not the only pathway that students use or should have access to throughout the transfer process. It is also important that postsecondary institutions recognize and value prior learning in all forms which requires a consistent process for prior learning and recognition. Recognizing prior learning outside of formal education settings is one way to improve access to university for economically marginalized students, creating more opportunities for employability and economic mobility. To this end, OUSA advocates for the use of Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition (PLAR), “a process for assessing the knowledge, skills, and abilities that a candidate has acquired in informal and non-formal settings for the purposes of awarding academic credit, and is practiced across Canada and internationally.”23 PLAR is required at all Colleges of Applied Arts and Technology, but not at Ontario universities.24 It is important that PLAR processes be available at all postsecondary institutions in the province, and it is equally important that PLAR processes be provided in accordance with best practices, including those offered by the Ministry of Colleges and Universities and the Canadian Association for Prior Learning Assessment (CAPLA).25 Knowing that best practices are always evolving to keep up with changing landscapes and contexts, the provincial government can support universities to offer PLAR processes in accordance with best practices by developing and hosting a digital repository for PLAR practitioners to share resources and best practices across institutions. This repository could be created in collaboration with groups like CAPLA and would create a space to not only share best 
18 Rod Missaghian, Is There a Transferable Sociology 'Core' in Ontario Colleges? A Content Analysis of First Year Course Outlines (Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, January 2021). 19 Ibid. 20 Ibid. 21 Ibid, 13. 22 Ibid. 23 Harrison, Best Practices in Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition, 4. 24 Ibid. 25 Ibid, 8-9. 
practices, but to collaborate across institutions and develop innovative solutions to difficult or novel decisions. 
A third area of credit recognition that would benefit from provincial support is assessment and recognition of microcredentials. Microcredentials are “used to recognize both vertical and transversal skills [and] coupled with the in-depth learning obtained in a field of study, micro-credentials can be used to present a more holistic view of an individual’s abilities and achievements.”26 In 2020 the provincial government invested $59.5 million over three years to support microcredentials through pilot programs, partnerships with postsecondary institutions, training providers and employers, public awareness campaigns, expansion of student financial aid, and a number of other initiatives to solidify the presence and legitimacy of microcredentials.27 However, there are currently no guidelines on how to recognize microcredentials for transfer students. Therefore, as part of the provincial government’s push for microcredentials, they should establish credit articulation and recognition guidelines for assessing the transferability of microcredentials. 
Currently there is no independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision. This is concerning not only because of the inconsistencies in credit recognition processes, but also because faculty have significant autonomy in granting credit transfers which can create inconsistencies in credit recognition and puts students in a precarious position. The significant role faculty play in credit recognition decisions is further complicated by the fact that “a ‘high degree of variation’ exists in the evaluative criteria used by faculty during transfer credit decisions” and there is an “absence of knowledge about how faculty perform transfer credit assessments.”28 One way to address this variability is for the provincial government to develop an accountability framework to encourage university and college faculty to collaborate and discuss disciplinary articulation.29 This framework should include clear and accessible information about who is responsible for hearing concerns, and processing appeals or challenges to decisions. This can be decided by each institution, depending on what makes sense given their size and resources available, but could be done through an ombuds office, academic advisors, or other means. 
However, students also require an independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision. To this end, the provincial government should develop guidelines for a process for challenging a credit recognition decision. This would support post-secondary institutions who choose to adopt such a process to do so in a consistent and comprehensive manner. These guidelines should articulate that there is a reverse onus on the faculty member or post-secondary institution to demonstrate that the standards for transfer credit have not been met, in line with the Lisbon Recognition Convention, to which Canada is a signatory.30 The guidelines should also outline who should and should not be making transfer credit decisions when a student brings a challenge forward. This person should not be the faculty member teaching the course the student would have to take should their challenge be unsuccessful. It could be an academic advisor or subject matter expert, which may be another faculty member in the discipline, so long as conflicts of interest and confidentiality are respected. The guidelines should also include a requirement that students be made aware of their right to challenge a transfer credit decision and the process for doing so. 
26 “Micro-Credentials,” eCampus Ontario, access October 8, 2021, https://www.ecampusontario.ca/micro-certifications/. 27 “Micro-credentials from Ontario’s postsecondary schools,” Government of Ontario, last updated September 22, 2021, https://www.ontario.ca/page/micro-credentials-ontarios-postsecondary-schools#section-4. 28 Missaghian, Is There a Transferable Sociology 'Core' in Ontario Colleges?, 4; see also Rod Missaghian, Exploring University Faculty Perceptions on Curriculum Evaluation: Sociology as a Case of First Year Transferability (Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, July 2021). 29 Missaghian, Exploring University Faculty Perceptions on Curriculum Evaluation, 12. 30 Missaghian, Is There a Transferable Sociology 'Core' in Ontario Colleges?. 
TIMELINESS + INFORMATION 
Principle: Students should have full transparency regarding transfer credit recognition prior to or alongside offers of admission. 
Principle: The timeline for when students receive information about transfer credit recognition should be consistent across all institutions. 
Principle: Students should have easy access to relevant information and support to assist with their transfer process. 
Principle: Information about how the transfer system works should be easily accessible to students. 
Principle: The transfer system should be simplified to allow for ease of transfer between institutions. 
Principle: Students who transfer due to campus climate and/or personal circumstances (e.g., mental health, experiences of racism, sexism, ableism, homophobia, transphobia, etc.) should not be penalized. 
Concern: Some institutions do not tell students which of their credits will be recognized until after they have accepted their offer of admission. 
Concern: Delayed information about what credits transfer may result in students changing or settling on different transfer plans. 
Concern: Transfer decisions are often made on a case-by-case basis which results in inconsistent information and academic support in regards to the transfer process. 
Concern: Many students are unsure of where to find information about transferring, including, but not limited to, fees, deadlines, and grade expectations. 
Concern: Many students transferring are confused and misled by conflicting and unclear information in a confusing system. 
Concern: Students who need to transfer due to campus climate issues or personal circumstances may not meet the grade requirements necessary to do so. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should incentivize universities to inform transfer students of transfer credit decisions alongside students’ offers of admission. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions develop appeal processes for students who believe the credit transfer timeline negatively impacted their ability to make a transfer decision. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions share information regarding credit decisions and timelines be publicly available to all stakeholders. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide envelope funding for post-secondary institutions to hire additional academic support services staff to work specifically with transfer students. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to combine oncat.ca and ONTransfer.ca for student ease and understanding, as well as funding to ensure the information is maintained, updated, and promoted in a timely manner to institutions and students. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate and provide funding for post-secondary institutions to develop an extenuating circumstances procedure for students looking to transfer who do not meet grade or program requirements due to circumstances beyond their control. 
Transfer students are frequently asked to make a decision regarding which institution they wish to transfer to, while only being provided with a standard credit equivalency list that is posted by institutions. Students looking to transfer are not given specific credit transfer decisions prior to applying or accepting an offer. There are some institutions that do provide credit transfer decisions with the offer of admission, including Brock University, Laurentian University, McMaster University, Western University, Wilfrid Laurier University, University of Ottawa, and University of Waterloo. However, Trent University’s timeline is four to six weeks after course syllabi are submitted, and Queen’s University provides credit transfer decisions two weeks after receiving the application.31 Although the majority of institutions already provide credit transfer decisions with the offer of admission, it is important for the provincial government to ensure that all students who are looking to transfer receive their credit transfer decisions along with the offer of admission from each institution. If students are not receiving the decisions with their offer of admission from one institution, but they receive it from another, this can impact their decision on where they will decide to transfer. As such, the provincial government should incentivize postsecondary institutions to inform transfer students of their transfer credit decisions alongside their offer of admission. This incentivization can look like increasing grant funding for institutions, recognizing that it often takes additional employees and time to ensure that this information is available to students alongside their offer of admission. In addition to incentivizing a quicker timeline process, the provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions develop an appeal process for students who feel like the timeline negatively impacted their ability to make a transfer decision. For students applying to transfer, timelines often have unforgiving deadlines about when decisions have to be made. However, recognizing that not all students receive the necessary information to make a decision with their offer of admission, or even before the window for acceptance closes, students may miss deadlines due to circumstances beyond their control. As such, by mandating post-secondary institutions have appeal processes in place, students would be able to appeal deadlines and decisions in a fair and timely manner. 
Students who are in the process of transferring require support and relevant information. In order to ensure that this is accessible to students, it is important that the government provides funding for institutions to hire additional academic support service workers who are familiar with the transfer process, ensuring this funding is proportional to student population. In 2011, the Ontario government implemented a plan to financially support institutions to increase supports, as well as new pathways for credit transfers.32 This was a step in the right direction, but ten years later it is crucial to identify the specific supports that transfer students require and ensure that those supports are adequately funded. Rather than funding supports for students more generally, the government should encourage institutions to provide supports that are specific to transfer students. This will make it easier for students to access relevant information from those who are educated on the transfer process, rather than relying on the current general academic supports. 
The Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) is an organization that works to improve the transfer pathways for students. Currently, ONCAT has more than one website that can make it confusing for students to locate information. The main website is oncat.ca, which focuses on their purpose and what they are about.33 In addition to this website, ONCAT also has ONTransfer.ca, which provides information on transfer pathways for students.34 The concern is that some students may assume ONCAT only has the main website, and they may not be able to locate the additional transfer website. Instead of having the websites separate, the provincial government should provide appropriate funding to ONCAT, and encourage them to merge the two websites, in order to have all of the information in one place. The funding provided should also be enough to assist ONCAT with updating information on available transfer pathways regularly, keeping it relevant for students. This will provide transfer students with information that is accessible and in one place. 
31 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, “Connect with a Transfer Advisor,” ONTransfer.ca, accessed October 26, 2021, https://ontransfer.ca/index_en.php?page=start_transfer&slide_id=4. 32 Report of the CMEC Credit Transfer Working Group. 33 “Welcome to ONCAT,” Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, accessed October 26, 2021, https://www.oncat.ca/en/welcome-oncat. 34 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, “Connect with a Transfer Advisor”. 
It is important to recognize that there are discrepancies in who transfers among post-secondary institutions. Women, students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, mature students, students with dependents, first generation students, part-time students, and students with disabilities are all more likely to transfer.35 Additionally, the third most reported reason for transferring in OUSA’s 2020 Ontario Undergraduate Student Survey was campus climate, with 36 percent of students choosing this reason.36 When transferring, students are expected to meet a minimum average for a credit to count, with averages ranging from 60 to 80 percent.37 For students who are transferring as a result of a negative campus climate, however, this may be unattainable and a barrier to transferring. For example, studies have shown that inequalities for students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds continue to impact academic performance, and students (overwhelmingly women) who have experienced and/or continue to experience sexual violence face exhaustive barriers, including negative impacts on their grades.38 As such, the provincial government should mandate and provide funding for post-secondary institutions to develop an extenuating circumstances procedure for students looking to transfer who do not meet grade or program requirements due to circumstances (i.e., experiences of systemic oppression, mental and physical health, etc.) beyond their control. These procedures should be developed in consultation with students at each institution, and should be trauma-informed and not rely on students to sharing traumatic and/or personal stories which can be retraumatizing for the student. 

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 
Principle: International transfer students should have access to informed and applicable support as they navigate transfer pathways and processes. 
Principle: International credit recognition processes and decisions should be consistent and timely. 
Principle: International students should have easy access to information about transferring within Ontario as an international student. 
Principle: International student support centres at post-secondary institutions should have access to funding to develop the necessary resources to support students who wish to transfer. 
Concern: There is limited research on the barriers to transfer and credit recognition faced by international students. 
Concern: International students face unique challenges when it comes to understanding and navigating complex transfer and credit recognition processes. 
Concern: There are limited resources to support credit assessments for international transfer students, accreditation or recognition of international transfer credits, and access to verifiable and sufficient international documents. 
35 Cathlene Hillier, Yujiro Sano, and David Zarifa, Transfer Pathways among Ontario Colleges and Universities (Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, 2021); Britney De Costa and Martyna Siekanowicz, Accessibility: Results from the 2017 Ontario Post-Secondary Student Survey (Toronto: Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance, 2019), 19. 36 Britney De Costa and Malika Dhanani, Accessibility: Results from the 2020 Ontario Undergraduate Student Survey (Toronto: Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance, forthcoming). 37 “Transfer Students,” York University, accessed October 26, 2021, https://futurestudents.yorku.ca/transfer/university-transfers; “University Transfer Student,” Trent University, accessed October 26, 2021, https://www.trentu.ca/futurestudents/undergraduate/requirements/transfer/university. 38 Scott Davies, Vicky Maldonada, and David Zarifa, “Effectively Maintaining Inequality in Toronto: Predicting Student Destinations in Ontario Universities,” Canadian Review of Sociology 51, no. 1 (2014), https://doi.org/10.1111/cars.12032; Sara B. Oswalt, Tanny 
J. Wyatt, and Yesenia Ochoa, “Sexual Assault is Just the Tip of the Iceberg: Relationship and Sexual Violence Prevalence in College Students,” Journal of College Student Psychotherapy 32, no. 2 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1080/87568225.2017.1350122. 
Concern: International students who do not inform Immigration and Citizenship Canada that they are transferring between institutions within Canada risk being asked to leave the country and may not be approved for future study or work permits. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide additional funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to support system-level research into the experiences and barriers faced by international students related to credit recognition and transfer. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should fund the development and maintenance of a system-wide equivalency and agreement database for international transfer. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach, support staff, and advisors for international students looking to transfer within Ontario. 
International students, like domestic students, may choose to transfer institutions for a variety of reasons. However, while international students may transfer for many of the same reasons as domestic students – including changing programs, campus culture, or upgrading credentials39 – international students may have additional motivating factors for transfer as a result of unethical and misleading recruitment practices, unregulated tuition fees, and the challenges of moving to a new country and adjusting to a new culture.40 And, unlike domestic students, international students face unique challenges given the complexity of immigration and visa requirements and the fact that some international transfer students are seeking credit recognition for prior learning done in other countries. As international students continue to see increased enrollment in Ontario post-secondary institutions – in 2019 Ontario was home to close to 307,000 international students41 – it is important that these students are not forgotten as we work to improve student mobility in the province. 
One important gap to address is the lack of research on international student transfer, both for those looking to transfer within Canada and those who are looking to transfer to Canada. This makes it difficult to understand the barriers and concerns international students face and makes it especially difficult to offer evidence-based solutions that account for the unique position of international students studying in, or looking to study in, Canada. Addressing this research gap is a necessary first step to ensuring: international transfer students have access to informed and applicable support as they navigate transfer pathways and processes; international credit recognition processes and decisions are consistent and timely; and international students have easy access to information about transferring within Ontario as an international student. The Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) currently leads and facilitates projects, stakeholder engagement, research, and resource sharing to improve academic pathways and reduce barriers for students looking to transfer within the province.42 Their leadership and expertise in the sector puts them in an ideal position to address this research gap. However, to ensure ONCAT has the capacity to take on this work, it is important that they have the financial means to do so, without impacting the important work they are doing to improve the transfer system more broadly. Therefore, OUSA recommends that the provincial government provide additional funding to ONCAT to support system-level research into the experiences and barriers faced by international students related to credit recognition and transfer. This funding could go towards project grants under ONCAT’s Research & Data Linkages funding stream for projects to “generate knowledge that can directly inform policies, 
39 De Costa & Dhanani, Accessibility. 40 For more on the unique experiences of international students in Ontario, see Shawn Cruz, Emma Evans, Matthew Gerrits, Fayza Ibrahim, Brook Snider, and Megan Town, International Students & International Education (Toronto: Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance, 2020). 41 Kareem El-Assal, “642,000 international students: Canada now ranks 3rd globally in foreign student attraction,” CICNews, February 20, 2020, https://www.cicnews.com/2020/02/642000-international-students-canada-now-ranks-3rd-globally-inforeign-student-attraction-0213763.html#gs.ch95z4. 42 “About Us,” Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, accessed October 26, 2021, https://www.oncat.ca/en/about-us. 
pathways, and institutional practices, which in turn contribute to a better understanding of system-wide issues that impact transfer and student mobility.”43 
This research should be broad and include transfer pathways and barriers to transfer for international students looking to transfer within Canada international students looking to transfer to an institution in Canada, and Ontario students who are studying abroad and looking to transfer credits from an international institution. One area that would be particularly helpful to focus on is the relationship between transfer and study permits or visas, given the consequences that can impact a person’s ability to remain in, or return to, Canada. International students who transfer institutions once they are in Canada are required to inform Immigration and Citizenship Canada of their transfer, and those who fail to do so risk being “asked to leave the country” and “may not be approved for another study or work permit in the future.”44 Given the serious, and potentially lifelong, consequences of failing to meet these requirements, it is critical that international students, international student advisors and other supports, institutions, sector stakeholders, and policy and decision makers have a clear and accurate understanding of these processes and what barriers international students face. 
For international students looking to transfer from their home country to a Canadian post-secondary institution and Ontario students looking to transfer credits they earned while studying abroad, one of the barriers is credit recognition. While Canada is a signatory to the Lisbon Recognition Convention and has a Pan-Canadian Quality Assurance Framework, there are currently limited resources to support credit assessments for international transfer students, accreditation or recognition of international credit transfers, and access to verifiable and sufficient international documents.45 These barriers can be incredibly costly for international students who already pay disproportionately high tuition fees, and having to retake or duplicate courses due to credit recognition failures only increases the cost of their education. To address some of these concerns, other provinces, including British Columbia and Alberta, are working to expand their course equivalency databases “to support international course equivalency decisions.”46 According to the British Columbia Council on Articulation and Transfer (BCCAT), “creating provincial and national course equivalency systems remains the goal of provincial councils of admission/articulation and transfer…[a goal which] is achievable, as evidenced by the publicly available international course equivalency databases created by select Canadian institutions.”47 Given the feasibility of such a database and the efforts that have already been made to this end, OUSA recommends that the provincial government fund the development and maintenance of such a database in Ontario to align with other provincial efforts working to create a system-wide equivalency and agreement database for international transfer. In addition to supporting international students transferring from their home or other countries they have studied in, this repository would also support students who have completed exchange programs abroad and are later looking to transfer. 
The second group of international transfer students who face barriers to transfer are those who transfer to a different institution within Canada. As highlighted above, international students transferring within Canada face many of the same challenges to transfer as domestic students, but there are added concerns and barriers with higher stakes as a result of the added layer of study permits and visas. The increased complexity of these processes and the heightened consequences of misunderstanding or incorrectly navigating these processes shows the importance of ensuring international students have access to informed support and specific information. Knowing that improvements to the transfer system more broadly will have a positive impact for international students, but that these students will also require supports that understand the complexities of transferring as an international student, OUSA recommends 
43 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, 2020-2021 Annual Report (Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, 2021), https://www.oncat.ca/en/about-us. 44 Immigration and Citizenship Canada, “Changing your school or program,” Government of Canada, last modified June 10, 2021, https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/services/study-canada/change-schools.html. 45 For more on the Lisbon Recognition Convention and Canada’s requirements as a signatory, and on the Pan-Canadian Quality Assurance Framework, see Joanne Duklas, International Transfer Credit Practices (BC Council on Admissions & Transfer, January 2019). 46 Ibid, 29. 47 Ibid, 32. 
that the provincial government provide funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach and support staff and advisors for international students looking to transfer within Ontario. 

SUPPORTS 
Principle: Transfer students should have access to informed and applicable support as they navigate transfer pathways and processes. 
Principle: Students should be informed, by both the province and post-secondary institutions, of transfer supports and resources available to them. 
Principle: Indigenous students, particularly those from Indigenous Institutes who may have more limited transfer pathway options, should not have to face additional barriers when transferring. 
Concern: Transfer pathways and credit recognition processes are complex, institution-, program-, and student-specific, and can be difficult to navigate for transfer students and potential transfer students who are often accessing these pathways for the first time. 
Concern: There are limited transfer-specific supports available to students looking to transfer or who are transitioning to a new institution. 
Concern: Important province-wide resources like ONTransfer.ca are not well-known and are therefore underutilized by transfer students. 
Concern: Indigenous students, particularly those from Indigenous Institutes, may have more limited options and may be forced to take on additional labour to educate and advocate for themselves throughout the transfer process, especially in an environment where there may not be many people with similar lived experiences. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach and support staff and advisors for transfer students. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should increase funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to continue maintaining, strengthening, and advertising ONTransfer.ca to ensure students are aware of and able to utilize this valuable resource. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate that all frontline staff, including academic advisors, have cultural competency training regarding how to best support and advise Indigenous transfer students, particularly those who are transferring from Indigenous Institutes and may be at higher risk experiencing cultural shock. 
The transfer system in Ontario can be confusing, complicated, and inaccessible for many students. Even as we continue to see improvements to support seamless transfer, the majority of transfer students are accessing transfer pathways for the first time and will require informed and applicable support, as well as access to resources to help them make informed decisions. The additional funding should also be used to hire Indigenous support staff knowledgeable of the transfer system for students attending Indigenous Institutes. 
One resource that is available to students is the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer’s (ONCAT) ONTransfer.ca, “an unofficial guide to how courses transfer from one institution to another.”48 For 
48 “Search for Course Transfers,” Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, accessed October 26, 2021, 
https://www.ontransfer.ca/index_en.php?page=c2c&user_action=courses&path=1#:~:text=ONTransfer.ca%20is%20an%20unoffi cial,university%20you%20plan%20to%20attend.&text=Save%20your%20course%20transfer%20data%20by%20creating%20a%20 MyONTransfer%20account. 
students who use ONTransfer.ca, this resource has been cited as being helpful in supporting their transfer process.49 However, ONTransfer.ca is an underutilized resource – of students who participated in OUSA’s 2020 Ontario Undergraduate Student Survey, only 5 percent of transfer students used ONTransfer.ca to guide or inform their credit recognition process.50 Given the usefulness of this resource for those who do use it, it is important that students know that it exists and what it offers. It is also important that ONTransfer.ca be as comprehensive and up to date as possible. While ONTransfer.ca is a great resource for college-to-university or university-to-college transfers, it could improve in the resources it offers for university-to-university, college-to-college, or other transfer types. To be able to do so, however, ONCAT must be sufficiently funded. To this end, OUSA recommends that the provincial government increase funding to ONCAT to continue to maintain, strengthen, and advertise ONTransfer.ca. 
Beyond ONTransfer.ca, which provides information about credit transfer and pathways, there are few transfer-specific supports for students. This gap includes individual supports to help students navigate their specific transfer pathway and credit recognition process, as well as more general supports such as those needed when transitioning to a new institution. Specifically, students have raised concerns about the limited number of transfer advisors available and the fact that those who are available are not representative of the students they are trying to serve which in itself is a barrier; that staff are often untrained which can create additional barriers for students looking to transfer; and that equivalencies for higher level credits are often not understood or recognized. These students are often left to figure out and navigate the process themselves and are often grouped in with first-year students during their orientation and transition period, which in many cases is inappropriate and does not provide the information or support that is needed for transfer students. A list of successful strategies for participation in transfer credit systems have been identified and include: “the creation of student outreach and support officers, or credit transfer positions, to help students understand institutional policies and procedures; provision of one-on-one advising to potential and confirmed students;...and customized [sic] student orientation specific to transfer students.”51 These strategies could be realized with the support of the provincial government, specifically through funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach and support staff and advisors for transfer students. 
TRANSFER PATHWAYS 
TRANSFERRING BETWEEN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES 
Principle: Courses that have comparable content and learning outcomes should be fairly considered and easily transferable regardless of the type of institution they are offered at. 
Principle: Universities should fairly consider and accept credits earned by college transfer students through relevant Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition processes. 
Principle: Students should have easy access to information about which resources and supports, such as transfer advisors, are available to them throughout the transfer process. 
Principle: All stakeholders should have access to information about the barriers and success rates of college-to-university and university-to-college transfer students to ensure transfer system and student success. 
Principle: Students should have access to a variety of relevant transfer pathways. 
49 De Costa & Dhanani, Accessibility. 50 Ibid. 51 Young, Piché, & Jones, “Student Pathways and Differentiation Policies in Ontario,” 37. 
Concern: Universities often do not consider college credits equivalent to university credits, even when the course content and learning outcomes are the same. 
Concern: Students who receive credits earned through Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition processes in college may be unable to transfer the credit to university, forcing them to take additional courses in an area where it has already been proven they have sufficient knowledge. 
Concern: Students transferring between colleges and universities are often not aware of which resources are available to them and how to access the support they need. 
Concern: Lack of consistent, relevant, and timely data on the success of transfer students and transfer pathways means stakeholders are often unaware of barriers to, and successes in, the transfer process. 
Concern: The limited number of transfer pathways, particularly in fields with fewer transfer options, makes it more difficult for students to be able to transfer. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should mandate universities to work with the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer in building consistent and appropriate tools, including key accountability measures, to fairly consider transfer credits, including those earned through Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition processes, from colleges. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding to institutions to implement and advertise additional support services for students looking to transfer to a different type of post-secondary institution. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to research and publish information regarding the barriers and successes of students transferring between colleges and universities and transfer pathways. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should encourage universities and colleges to develop transfer pathways, particularly in fields and/or programs that have a limited number of existing pathways. 
The Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer’s (ONCAT) main focus is to support and advocate for students who are transferring. With this in mind, it is important for the provincial government to mandate that universities work with ONCAT. The Ontario government’s plan that was announced in 2011, covered the ideas of improving pathways, supports, and accountability.52 To emphasize how crucial the purpose of these ideas are to the success of the transfer process, it is important to implement a plan. A first step is to mandate that universities work with ONCAT to build an improved transfer system. Specifically, consistent and appropriate tools must be created to avoid confusion for students. Guaranteeing accountability is crucial for students to feel confident in trusting the institutions. Ontario currently does not have a framework for accountability.53 Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition (PLAR) processes and transfer credits must also be an area of focus. ONCAT can assist universities in implementing systems that include evaluating and accepting credits earned through PLAR processes and transfer credits. Building strong partnerships between ONCAT and universities will help to improve the transfer system. 
Students who receive credits earned through PLAR processes in college may be unable to transfer the credit to university, forcing them to take additional courses in an area where it has already been proven they have sufficient knowledge. Although a student’s transcript does not indicate whether a credit was earned through a PLAR process as these credits are only reflected through some sort of indication that it is a complete, there is currently no framework for assessing the equivalency of credits earned through 
52 Report of the CMEC Credit Transfer Working Group. 53 Missaghian, Exploring University Faculty Perceptions on Curriculum Evaluation. 
PLAR processes when those credits are being assessed for transfer. This is a gap that can contribute to unnecessary repeated learning and create barriers for some transfer students. 
Locating information is crucial for students looking to transfer. The provincial government should provide funding to institutions to increase the advertisement of information in order to make it more accessible to students. It is not ideal to require students to search for information, as this can create a barrier. Advertising additional supports that students can access to locate relevant information will help to eliminate this barrier for students. Transfer pathways include transfers between different types of postsecondary institutions. This emphasizes the importance of advertising supports, as students are not always familiar with how other types of post-secondary institutions operate. College students transferring to university should be given the same resources as high school students entering university, as college students can be intimidated and unfamiliar with the university culture. These resources can include tutorials on how to use the school’s online learning and teaching platforms, how to select courses, how to apply for entrance scholarships, etc. 
Across the board, for potential transfer students and stakeholders, information about the success of transfer students is crucial for decision making and advocacy. For example, while OUSA has collected some demographic information about students who transfer through our biennial surveys of students at our member schools, these have a limited reach and cannot account for all students who transfer. However, ONCAT’s unique role in the entire Ontario transfer system gives them the knowledge and insight needed to paint a more accurate picture of Ontario’s transfer students. As well as a lack of demographic information in the Ontario transfer system, the limited focus on the number of students who have transferred and creating articulation agreements is detrimental to understanding the quality of the transfer system, the success and graduation rates of transfer students, or students' sense of belonging at their new institution.54 Information like this is key for numerous reasons, such as the idea that when students are provided with information, and are aware of different opportunities, like the ability to transfer, it encourages their journey and continuation in post-secondary.55 In addition to information for individual student success, having a variety of information about the successes and barriers in the Ontario transfer process provides stakeholders with clear strategies moving forward. Recognizing this, the provincial government should provide funding to ONCAT to research and publish information on transfer pathways and the success of students transferring between colleges and universities. 
Currently, there are almost 2,000 credit-transfer pathways among the various post-secondary institutions in Ontario.56 Tools, such as memoranda of understanding (MOUs), articulation agreements, and formal pathway programs, are a great way to support students for a variety of reasons, such as limiting the extent of credit loss during transfer which in turn increases students’ chances of graduating.57 Additionally, transfer pathways have the added benefit of costing either the same or less than direct entry, for both students and governments.58 However, particular programs are underrepresented in the number of transfer pathways available – such as public administration, agriculture, and art.59 This is important when we remember that the vast majority of transfer students (87 percent) transfer into programs that are at least somewhat related to their former area of study.60 Therefore, the provincial government should encourage post-secondary institutions to develop transfer pathways, particularly in fields and/or programs that have a limited number of existing pathways. 
There are some successful transfer pathways that can be used as a model for the development of transfer pathways. For example, engineering students have pointed to college-to-university transfer pathways for 
54 Ontario’s Differentiation Policy Framework for Post-Secondary Education (Government of Ontario, 2013). 55 Lennon at al., Ontario Student Mobility. 56 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, “Switching Schools”. 57 Roger Pizarro Milian and Yvette Munro, “Credit Transfer, Articulation, & the Future of Work Towards a Federal Strategy,” Canadian Journal of Higher Education 50, no. 3 (2020); Rod Missaghian, Policy Innovations in Transfer: A Look Across the United States (Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, 2020). 58 David Trick, College-to-University Transfer Arrangements and Undergraduate Education: Ontario in a National and International Context (Toronto: Higher Education Quality Council of Ontario, 2013), 18. 59 Determined using ONTransfer.ca “Search Transfer Pathways” tool, here: https://search.ontransfer.ca/. 60 Trick, College-to-University Transfer Arrangements and Undergraduate Education. 
engineering students at St. Mary’s University, St. Francis Xavier University, and Lakehead University as successful transfer pathways that could be replicated in the development of transfer pathways.61 
INDIGENOUS INSTITUTES, AND PRIVATE AND FRANCOPHONE INSTITUTIONS-TO-UNIVERSITY 
Principle: Students from Indigenous Institutes, and private and Francophone institutions, should be provided with relevant and consistent information in regards to how the transfer process works from their place of study. 
Principle: Students from Indigenous Institutes should have the ability and opportunity to transfer to a publicly assisted university or college through relevant transfer pathways. 
Principle: As an equal, third pillar of the post-secondary sector, Indigenous Institutes should be properly consulted and included in relevant provincial policies. 
Principle: Indigenous Institutes should have access to provincial funding to develop the necessary resources to support students who wish to transfer. 
Principle: Students who are unable to continue their bilingual/French education in Ontario should be supported in finding education outside of the province. 
Concern: There is minimal, if any, data discussing the barriers, supports, and potential solutions for transfer students from Indigenous Institutes, and private and Francophone institutions, to publicly assisted universities in Ontario. 
Concern: Students from Indigenous Institutes, and private and Francophone institutions, are not given the option to select their current place of study on ONTransfer.ca, as the program search only provides options for college or university, making the transfer process inaccessible. 
Concern: There are limited transfer pathways or articulation agreements between Indigenous Institutes and public universities and colleges, making it difficult for students who wish to transfer. 
Concern: Indigenous Institutes are not present in policies relevant to transferring institutions, creating a barrier for students wanting to transfer. 
Concern: There is a lack of funding for Indigenous Institutes to develop and provide the support and resources that students need to transfer institutions. 
Concern: There is a lack of institutions that provide relevant programs for Francophone students in Ontario, and as a result students may wish to transfer outside of the province but often have a difficult time doing so. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to research and publish a report and make recommendations on demographics, reasons for transfer, barriers, and supports for students transferring from Indigenous Institutes, private, or Francophone institutions to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
61 “Engineering Program,” St. Mary’s University, accessed December 7, 2021, https://www.smu.ca/academics/engineering-program.html?fbclid=IwAR2pMCAHuofgkw9gMOH5eHDp47WvQfnJOBqWktAqabv3WSUS0zVQAYtOWkM; “About Engineering,” St. Francis Xavier University, accessed December 7, 2021, https://www.stfx.ca/academics/science/engineering?fbclid=IwAR3x4ZKdbXHtx6eaIRXg5BTCmhvCUSjkZOfq8mSL_iTwnA0QlRL a0OKw1WE; “Engineering: College Transfer Program,” Lakehead University, accessed December 7, 2021, https://www.lakeheadu.ca/programs/faculties/engineering/college-transferprogram?fbclid=IwAR0OtWxNkkBV2Q1zS_hOwihBwlFYaqrsIU6Y3xlj9hLrMypf4jlq8rQMhq0. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should adopt the recommendations made by the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to support students transferring from Indigenous Institutes, private or Francophone institutions to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer with funding to update Ontario Postsecondary Transfer Guide with relevant and specific information for students from Indigenous Institute, private and Francophone institutions looking to transfer to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should encourage publicly assisted post-secondary institutions to work with Indigenous Institutes to develop specific pathway programs to facilitate transferring. 
Recommendation: Upon the development and review of existing government policies related to transfer, the provincial government should work with Indigenous Institutes to ensure that they are represented in policies and eligible for related funding. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should provide funding to Indigenous Institutes to develop resources necessary to build transfer systems and pathways. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should expand the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer’s mandate to include working outside the province where necessary, particularly for Francophone students looking to transfer to continue their bilingual/French education. 
Research and information is very limited when it comes to Indigenous Institutes and Francophone institutions. When respondents to the 2020 Ontario Undergraduate Student Survey were asked which transfer pathway they took, only one percent of respondents transferred from an Indigenous Institute to a university.62 Francophone institutions were not included in this survey. This is one small piece of data that helps to display the barriers students who attend Indigenous Institutes and Francophone institutions face, as it is clear there are not enough pathways created for Indigenous students, and that Francophone students are rarely included in data collection. The provincial government must provide the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) with funding to conduct research and collect data on the barriers that students from Indigenous Institutes and Francophone institutions face. Once the data is collected, it is important for the provincial government to support ONCAT in producing suggestions to properly support these students. Once completed, it is the provincial government’s responsibility to act upon the recommendations produced by ONCAT. It is important to note that ONCAT is focusing on improving transfer pathways between Indigenous Institutes and other post-secondary institutions and the provincial government should support these efforts.63 
The Ontario Post-Secondary Transfer Guide focuses mostly on the two main transfer pathways, which are between colleges and universities (i.e., university-to-college, and college-to-university). Because the information is catered towards college-to-university and university-to-college pathways, it creates a barrier for students transferring from Indigenous Institutes or Francophone institutions.64 The provincial government should provide ONCAT with funding to maintain relevant information on the transfer process, including pathways for students transferring from Indigenous Institutes and Francophone institutions, rather than only focusing on colleges and universities. 
Formal transfer pathways, memoranda of understanding (MOUs), and articulation agreements can be a supportive factor for transfer students and ensuring their success at the post-secondary institution at which they arrive. Currently, limited formal transfer pathways, MOUs, and articulation agreements exist between Indigenous Institutes and publicly-assisted post-secondary institutions. For example, Anishinabek Education Institute has zero transfer agreements, while Six Nations Institute has 148. While 
62 De Costa & Dhanani, Accessibility. 63 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, 2020-2021 Annual Report. 64 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, “Explore your Transfer Pathways,” ONTransfer.ca, accessd October 26, 2021, https://www.ontransfer.ca/index_en.php?page=exploring_options&sec_id=3. 
148 transfer pathways may seem like many options, this is compared to the almost 2,000 transfer pathways in Ontario.65 Recognizing this, the provincial government should encourage publicly assisted post-secondary institutions to work with Indigenous Institutes to develop specific pathway programs to facilitate transferring for these underserved stakeholders. This can be done through official memos and working with ONCAT to help facilitate the development of these pathways between Indigenous Institutes and publicly-assisted institutions. 
In addition to work that individual post-secondary institutions can take on to build better relationships and pathways with Indigenous Institutes, the provincial government can also take steps towards addressing unequal access to the resources needed to develop transfer pathways. For example, all Indigenous Institutes have outlined a lack of funding, and urgent need for commitment from federal and provincial governments to address a variety of issues, from physical infrastructure to mental health to developing credit transfer pathways.66 However, in many government policies and grants, Indigenous Institutes do not qualify. Going forward, there are two ways for the provincial government to address this: first, the provincial government should work with Indigenous Institutes to ensure that they are represented in policies and eligible for related funding, upon the development of new and review of existing policies; second , the provincial government should provide funding to Indigenous Institutes to develop resources necessary to build transfer systems and pathways. The first recommendation is a commitment to consultations with Indigenous Institutes, to ensure that they are viewed properly as the third pillar of the post-secondary sector, and works to grandfather these institutions into existing programs. The second recommendation works to alleviate immediate barriers for Indigenous Institutes and their students. 
Finally, while ONCAT’s mandate is focused on Ontario and its students, this can prove a limitation and barrier for Francophone and/or bilingual students, particularly with the announcement of Laurentian University’s insolvency, as one of the few bilingual institutions in Ontario. With a limited knowledge and ability to support students looking to transfer to Francophone or bilingual programs outside of Ontario, students are left to navigate the transfer process themselves. To address this concern, the provincial government should expand ONCAT’s mandate to include working outside the province where necessary, particularly for Francophone students looking to transfer to continue their bilingual/French education. This would help ensure that Francophone and bilingual students are able to access the support needed to continue their studies in French. 
DATA 
Principle: Demographic information on students is vital to all stakeholders in the development of services to support student success and broader sector sustainability. 
Principle: Data on credit transfer pathways offers a vital source of knowledge to inform accountability, quality of education, and positive outcomes across the post-secondary sector. 
Principle: All post-secondary stakeholders should have access to data about transfer students and their successes/barriers. 
Principle: Comprehensive data on credit transfer is essential to ensuring institutional supports for transfer students are sufficiently funded to best meet their needs. 
Concern: The current lack of available data on who transfers, why, and student outcomes after transferring can detrimentally hurt students’ ability to make informed choices and understand how the transfer process can impact their success in post-secondary. 
65 Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, “Switching Schools”. 66 Indigenous Institutes Consortium, Developing a Funding Strategy for Indigenous Institutes: Report to the Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities (Indigenous Institutes Consortium, January 9, 2019). 
Concern: There is currently a lack of data on credit transfer pathways which hinders the ability to make informed decisions to support broader sector sustainability. 
Concern: Limited data on credit transfer pathways that does exist is either not publicly available or it is inaccessible to sector stakeholders. 
Concern: There is currently insufficient funding for transfer student supports, which negatively impacts post-secondary institutions’ abilities to meet transfer student needs. 
Recommendation: The Council of Ontario Universities and the Ontario College Application Service should develop and implement a non-compulsory survey through the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre and ontariocolleges.ca to gather demographic information on students, including transfer students, when they apply to universities and colleges. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should task and fund the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to collect data and publicly report on why students transfer, which students transfer, what credits were successfully transferred, and student success rates (including, but not limited to: graduation rates, sense of belonging, GPAs, etc.) once they have transferred. 
Recommendation: The provincial government should change the Credit Transfer Institutional Grant to be based on application and need, rather than solely the number of transfer students. 
Data and research on transfer students and transfer pathways is vital to supporting student success and sector sustainability. Specifically, demographic data, information on transfer pathways, and other comprehensive data on student mobility and credit transfer can be used to identify and remove barriers to student success, enhance accountability and quality of education, and implement evidence-based supports and interventions. This data, if gathered ethically and thoughtfully, would offer a wealth of knowledge to inform accountability and good outcomes across the post-secondary sector. For example, data on who transfers and why can help institutions better understand retention rates and identify areas of improvement to ensure they are offering safe, equitable, and meaningful education opportunities to all students. Research and data can also be used to ensure that appropriate funding levels are provided to support transfer students and to see a more equitable distribution of funding across the sector. 
Unfortunately, there is a significant gap in research and data on transfer students and transfer pathways. The Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer (ONCAT) supports and facilitates a number of research projects working to fill this gap, but resources are limited and there continues to be much more that needs to be done. Some of the research gaps identified by sector stakeholders include graduation rates for transfer students and differences between institutions; international students and transfer; and, importantly, transfer student demographics. 
Additionally, what little data there is not publicly available making it inaccessible to students and many sector stakeholders who need this information to make informed decisions and hold institutions and governments accountable. And while there is some understanding of who transfers, and potential reasons for transfer, this is often based on data from a limited sample or limited depth of questions. For example, OUSA asks questions about credit transfer reasons and experiences in our biennial Ontario Undergraduate Student Survey (OUSS, formerly the Ontario Post-Secondary Student Survey) but this survey is only administered at eight universities across the province and often has a limited number of participants, many of whom have never engaged with transfer pathways – in the most recent iteration of the OUSS, only 15 percent of participants had transferred credits.67 
To help address gaps in demographic data, the Council of Ontario Universities and the Ontario College Application Service (OCAS) should develop and implement a non-compulsory survey through the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre (OUAC) and ontariocolleges.ca to gather demographic information on students, including transfer students, when they apply to universities. Given the fact that the majority of students apply to universities in Ontario through OUAC and colleges through ontariocolleges.ca, this 
67 De Costa & Dhanani, Accessibility. 
would offer the ideal population sample without excessive costs or placing an undue burden on students. However, it is critical that sharing demographic information remain non-compulsory. For many communities, particularly Indigenous and racialized communities, there is an understandable distrust due to being surveilled and over-researched by government bodies. A non-compulsory survey of this nature would be beneficial to understanding the makeup of transfer student populations, but also students entering the post-secondary sector more broadly. Having key demographic information can be useful for research and to anticipate trends, as well as to inform new and unique ways to advocate for supports for different communities in the sector. 
However, demographic information is just one aspect of research needed. The other aspect needed is to look at the success of transfer students once they have transferred. For students, this data can help reassure them of their decision to transfer, and for advocates, it can highlight barriers that need addressing. Therefore, the provincial government should task, and fund, ONCAT to collect data and publicly report on why students transfer, which students transfer, what credits were successfully transferred, and their success rates (including, but not limited to: graduation rates, sense of belonging, GPAs, etc.) once they have transferred. 
Importantly, understanding the transfer landscape requires funding. Currently, the Ministry of Colleges and Universities provides post-secondary institutions with funding through the Credit Transfer Institutional Grant – approximately $9.5 million with 60 percent going to publicly-assisted universities and 40 percent going to publicly-assisted colleges. The amount of funding each institution receives is based on the number of transfer students rather than how the funds will be used. This raises concerns about the effectiveness of the funding to support research and data collection initiatives, including databases and credit transfer assessments, particularly for smaller institutions who may have fewer transfer students and therefore only receive $70,000-$100,000.68 One way to improve the effectiveness of this Grant is to amend funding allotment criteria to be based on application and need, rather than solely the number of transfer students. To mitigate the application burden, the Grant should be recurring on a 3year cycle. There is also opportunity for a deeper exploration into the effectiveness of grant-based funding in this area as sector-leaders like ONCAT have proposed the potential to mirror what is being done in British Columbia where funding is embedded in provincial operational funding and considered in future Strategic Mandate Agreements in order to allow for consistent and reliable funding, and to send a strong signal to the sector that credit transfer is important. 
68 Personal communication with Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer, September 2021. 

POLICY STATEMENT 
Whereas: Institutions should not use transfer fees as a way to generate profit. Whereas: Students should be able to easily, directly, and seamlessly pay transfer fees. Whereas: Students should be able to freely and easily access their own documentation, including 
documentation from prior educational institutions. Whereas: Students should not have to pay unnecessary application fees. Whereas: Students should have access to documentation without having to take on a financial burden. Whereas: Available credit recognition processes, such as Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition, 
should be affordable and accessible for all students who want or need them. 
Whereas: Students who are forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program should be supported throughout the process by both the institution and the government. Whereas: Post-secondary institutions should recognize and value various ways of knowing and learning 
outside of formal education systems. Whereas: Students should not be required to retake course content they have already learned. Whereas: Students who have relevant prior learning, knowledge, or experience should be supported 
when seeking to upgrade their credentials. 
Whereas: Students should have access to clear, comprehensive information about the difference between course equivalencies and transferable credits for programs they are seeking to transfer to. Whereas: Students should be able to challenge credit recognition decisions. Whereas: Post-secondary institutions should recognize microcredentials when assessing a student’s 
prior learning and/or course equivalencies during the transfer process. 
Whereas: Students should have full transparency regarding transfer credit recognition prior to or alongside offers of admission. Whereas: The timeline for when students receive information about transfer credit recognition should 
be consistent across all institutions. 
Whereas: Students should have easy access to relevant information and support to assist with their transfer process. Whereas: Information about how the transfer system works should be easily accessible to students. Whereas: The transfer system should be simplified to allow for ease of transfer between institutions. Whereas: Students who transfer due to campus climate and/or personal circumstances (e.g., mental 
health, experiences of racism, sexism, ableism, homophobia, transphobia, etc.) should not be penalized. 
Whereas: International transfer students should have access to informed and applicable support as they navigate transfer pathways and processes. Whereas: International credit recognition processes and decisions should be consistent and timely. Whereas: International students should have easy access to information about transferring within 
Ontario as an international student. 
Whereas: International student support centres at post-secondary institutions should have access to funding to develop the necessary resources to support students who wish to transfer. 
Whereas: Transfer students should have access to informed and applicable support as they navigate transfer pathways and processes. 
Whereas: Students should be informed, by both the province and post-secondary institutions, of transfer supports and resources available to them. 
Whereas: Indigenous students, particularly those from Indigenous Institutes who may have more limited transfer pathway options, should not have to face additional barriers when transferring. 
Whereas: Courses that have comparable content and learning outcomes should be fairly considered and easily transferable regardless of the type of institution they are offered at. 
Whereas: Universities should fairly consider and accept credits earned by college transfer students through relevant Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition processes. 
Whereas: Students should have easy access to information about which resources and supports, such as transfer advisors, are available to them throughout the transfer process. 
Whereas: All stakeholders should have access to information about the barriers and success rates of college-to-university and university-to-college transfer students to ensure transfer system and student success. 
Whereas: Students should have access to a variety of relevant transfer pathways. 
Whereas: Students from Indigenous Institutes, and private and Francophone institutions, should be provided with relevant and consistent information in regards to how the transfer process works from their place of study. 
Whereas: Students from Indigenous Institutes should have the ability and opportunity to transfer to a publicly assisted university or college through relevant transfer pathways. 
Whereas: As an equal, third pillar of the post-secondary sector, Indigenous Institutes should be properly consulted and included in relevant provincial policies. 
Whereas: Indigenous Institutes should have access to provincial funding to develop the necessary resources to support students who wish to transfer. 
Whereas: Students who are unable to continue their bilingual/French education in Ontario should be supported in finding education outside of the province. 
Whereas: Demographic information on students is vital to all stakeholders in the development of services to support student success and broader sector sustainability. 
Whereas: Data on credit transfer pathways offers a vital source of knowledge to inform accountability, quality of education, and positive outcomes across the post-secondary sector. 
Whereas: All post-secondary stakeholders should have access to data about transfer students and their successes/barriers. 
Whereas: Comprehensive data on credit transfer is essential to ensuring institutional supports for transfer students are sufficiently funded to best meet their needs. 
Be it resolved that: The provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions include a breakdown of what is included in transfer fees, including supplemental documentation/evaluation fees, to students before they are charged. 
Be it further resolved that (BIFRT): The provincial government should mandate that all universities in Ontario include any transfer-related fees as part of the supplemental/document evaluation fee paid via the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre or ontariocolleges.ca. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should mandate that the application fee for students seeking to transfer is not tied to a minimum number of applications or exceed the number of programs to which a student may choose to apply. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should develop envelope funding for registrars’ offices to cover the cost associated with providing students with official documentation, such as official transcripts and enrollment verification forms. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding to post-secondary institutions under the mandate that all post-secondary institutions commit to offering affordable Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition in accordance with best practices to ensure the process is transparent to students. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide broad emergency funding to all students who are forced to transfer due to the closure of their institution or program to assist with application, relocation, and other transfer-related costs. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should develop and host a digital repository for Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition practitioners to share resources and best practices across institutions. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should develop, standardize, and host a public repository of course outlines at all post-secondary institutions in the province. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should, in consultation with the Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations, the Council of Ontario Universities, and Colleges Ontario, develop standardized language for syllabi and course outlines to assist with transfer decisions. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should, in consultation with the Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations, the Council of Ontario Universities, and Colleges Ontario, develop key learning outcomes and skills aimed at first-and second-year foundational courses to assist with transfer decisions. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should develop an accountability framework to encourage university and college faculty to collaborate and discuss disciplinary articulation. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should develop guidelines to support institutions to outline an independent, clear, consistent, and accessible process for challenging a credit recognition decision that includes who can and cannot make decisions as well as support systems for students throughout the appeal process. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should establish credit articulation and recognition guidelines for assessing the transferability of microcredentials. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should incentivize universities to inform transfer students of transfer credit decisions alongside students’ offers of admission. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions develop appeal processes for students who believe the credit transfer timeline negatively impacted their ability to make a transfer decision. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should mandate that post-secondary institutions share information regarding credit decisions and timelines be publicly available to all stakeholders. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide envelope funding for post-secondary institutions to hire additional academic support services staff to work specifically with transfer students. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to combine oncat.ca and ONTransfer.ca for student ease and understanding, as well as funding to ensure the information is maintained, updated, and promoted in a timely manner to institutions and students. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should mandate and provide funding for post-secondary institutions to develop an extenuating circumstances procedure for students looking to transfer who do not meet grade or program requirements due to circumstances beyond their control. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide additional funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to support system-level research into the experiences and barriers faced by international students related to credit recognition and transfer. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should fund the development and maintenance of a system-wide equivalency and agreement database for international transfer. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach, support staff, and advisors for international students looking to transfer within Ontario. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding for post-secondary institutions to hire student outreach and support staff and advisors for transfer students. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should increase funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to continue maintaining, strengthening, and advertising ONTransfer.ca to ensure students are aware of and able to utilize this valuable resource. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should mandate that all frontline staff, including academic advisors, have cultural competency training regarding how to best support and advise Indigenous transfer students, particularly those who are transferring from Indigenous Institutes and may be at higher risk experiencing cultural shock. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should mandate universities to work with the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer in building consistent and appropriate tools, including key accountability measures, to fairly consider transfer credits, including those earned through Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition processes, from colleges. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding to institutions to implement and advertise additional support services for students looking to transfer to a different type of post-secondary institution. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to research and publish information regarding the barriers and successes of students transferring between colleges and universities and transfer pathways. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should encourage universities and colleges to develop transfer pathways, particularly in fields and/or programs that have a limited number of existing pathways. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding to the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to research and publish a report and make recommendations on demographics, reasons for transfer, barriers, and supports for students transferring from Indigenous Institutes, private, or Francophone institutions to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should adopt the recommendations made by the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to support students transferring from Indigenous Institutes, private or Francophone institutions to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer with funding to update Ontario Postsecondary Transfer Guide with relevant and specific information for students from Indigenous Institute, private and Francophone institutions looking to transfer to publicly assisted post-secondary institutions in Ontario. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should encourage publicly assisted post-secondary institutions to work with Indigenous Institutes to develop specific pathway programs to facilitate transferring. 
BIFRT: Upon the development and review of existing government policies related to transfer, the provincial government should work with Indigenous Institutes to ensure that they are represented in policies and eligible for related funding. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should provide funding to Indigenous Institutes to develop resources necessary to build transfer systems and pathways. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should expand the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer’s mandate to include working outside the province where necessary, particularly for Francophone students looking to transfer to continue their bilingual/French education. 
BIFRT: The Council of Ontario Universities and the Ontario College Application Service should develop and implement a non-compulsory survey through the Ontario Universities’ Application Centre and ontariocolleges.ca to gather demographic information on students, including transfer students, when they apply to universities and colleges. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should task and fund the Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer to collect data and publicly report on why students transfer, which students transfer, what credits were successfully transferred, and student success rates (including, but not limited to: graduation rates, sense of belonging, GPAs, etc.) once they have transferred. 
BIFRT: The provincial government should change the Credit Transfer Institutional Grant to be based on application and need, rather than solely the number of transfer students. 



